The project is aimed at evaluating the applicability of machine learning methodology when applied to automated well log creation towards reliable lithology prediction and subsequent reservoir characterization to overcome the computationally intensive and laborious manual analysis of well logs for improving the cost of exploration, better accuracy of predictions, as well as improved efficiency of production operations.

The results are based on a publicly available set of well logs at the South Newark Basin section at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and the wells under consideration are Rutgers, Somerset, Martinsville, Princeton, and Weston Canal of Newark South Basin, USA. The logs taken into account for the inventory creation from the dataset include Caliper log, Dual spaced neutron log (GR), Density log (RHOB), Neutron Porosity (NPHI), Sonic log, and Resistivity log. The data inventory also contains several features derived from an extensive parametric analysis using empirical relations on the above mentioned well logs.

Synthetic logs are first generated using python libraries like seaborn and matplotlib. K-means clustering algorithm is then applied to group the depth points representing similar lithology type. The performance has been evaluated using cluster performance metric such bas silhouette and CH scores. This is followed by a successful attempt to enhance the visualization efficiency through dimensionality reduction using Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Finally, a predictive model for reliable prediction of lithology for unknown depth points is created using linear regression approach by identifying the parameters having the highest probability of influencing the lithology type using correlation matrix. The model performance has been evaluated using RMSE and r-squared methods. The output of the proposed approach has also been compared with other state-of-the art methods like KNN, Support vector regression and Multivariate regression.
